---
layout: post
title:  "Everyday"
categories: Life
author: K°
tags: Life
---
### Not everyday can be a total success...

### My Negatives:
- I woke up late today.
- Today has been a high pain day.
- The bag I wanted to buy on TikTok shop was sold out.
- My four-year-old is still feeling off color.

### My Positives:
- My fourteen-year-old told me that she loves me.
- My son gave me a kiss and a hug.
- My posts are really great today.
- I managed to eat a small amount today.

### My Thoughts on Today:
- Waking up late means that I started my work late, but apparently my body needed the rest.
- Pain is an everyday thing with me, but today it was just relentless. Although I did manage to distract myself.
- There's a floral motif LoveVook canvas tote bag that I've been eying for months, but everytime I try to buy it, it's sold out.
- My four-year-old didn't eat much today, and it's a clear indicator that he's feeling poorly.
- My fourteen-year-old rarely tells me that she loves me, so when she did, it was a bit of a shock.
- My four-year-old is not overly affectionate, so when he is, it's so special.
- I'm really proud of the posts that I've done today and the learning of WebStorm is coming along.
- Also, I like this post especially, and I think that I may add it to my everyday posts.
- I don't eat much by mouth lately because of the gj kangaroo tube, but today I managed to eat cereal and half of a chicken sandwich.

Questions to Consider:
What are your thoughts about today?
What are your negatives regarding today?
What are your positives regarding today?

<!-- signature -->
{% assign imagePath = "/assets/images/kojika-signature.png" | relative_url %}
{% include post-image-signature.liquid imagePath = imagePath %}